File:		README
Author:		Geoffrey Furnish
Date:		17 January 1994

This directory holds the C++ Data Structures Library, libds++.a.

The intent here is that I will collect a variety of useful data
structure classes and keep them here.  This is in an effort to "do
something" about the complete lack of a standard set of classes for
C++.  Many C++ libraries exist, but most are commercial, and many of
the compiler vendors don't supply any class library at all.  There is
libg++, but it requires the GNU compiler, which is also not available
on many machines (like Cray's, for instantce).  USL's SC is good, but
some Cfront vendors, like SUN, don't provide it.

It all adds up to being a major source of exasperation.  There
basically is no good, free (or even widely available, where "widely"
means "on all the machines I use") class library of generally useful
data structures for C++.

This directory, then, will contain my own growing collection of such
things.  I hate reinventing the wheel, but at least I'm going to make
mine so it rolls :-).

Fair Use:

This library is provided under the terms of the GNU Library General
Public License (LGPL).  Details are found in the file COPYING.LIB in
this directory.  The LGPL applies to all files in this directory, and
no further per-file legal attributions will be made.

Use of the LGPL is intended to allow free use of this software.  It
was also chosen in preference to the standard GPL, so as not to
preclude use in commercial contexts.  The LGPL, like the GPL requires
that source be provided on request, but it also permits the binary
representations of these files to be distributed as long as source is
provided.  This is a complete non-issue in the context of templated
C++ source code, since both the headers and the implementation files
must be available in order for the template instantiation mechanism to
work anyway.

